---
layout: post
title: "Cell Set as Unstructured Grid"
---

In the last 2 blogs ([1]({% post_url 2015-02-12-zero-copy-arrays %}),
[2]({% post_url 2015-02-13-zero-copy-sync-templates %})), we have looked at creating
`vtkMappedDataArray<>` subclasses to represent different memory layouts. This
enabled us to represent various types of grids without explicitly storing the
point coordinates. In this blog, we will take this idea to the next step and
create an unstructured grid that uses a `vtkMappedDataArray<>` to represent
its points but also store its connectivity implicitly. There are many use cases
for this. For example, we can develop a better threshold filter. The current
implementation (`vtkThreshold`) creates an unstructured grid no matter the input type.
For structured data, this can be terribly memory inefficient because it creates
connectivity arrays and potentially a new explicit point coordinates array
(for `vtkImageData` and `vtkRectilinearGrid`). One alternative to this
approach is to create a new unstructured grid type that stores the input
dataset and a set of cell ids that meet the threshold criteria. We will cover
how such a class can be defined using the zero copy infrastructure. I will describe
the new threshold algorithm in detail in a future blog.

## vtkImagePointsArray

First, let's recap the points array from
[a previous blog]({% post_url 2015-02-12-zero-copy-arrays %}). The full source for
this array is [here](https://github.com/berkgeveci/berkgeveci.github.io/blob/jekyll/code/zero-copy/vtkImagePointsArray.h)
and [here](https://github.com/berkgeveci/berkgeveci.github.io/blob/jekyll/code/zero-copy/vtkImagePointsArray.txx). In summary, `vtkImagePointsArray` is a sub-class of
`vtkMappedArray<>` that obtains its values from a `vtkImageData` rather than from an
array stored explicitly. This enables us to represent unstructured grids with
implicit point coordinates. The meat of this class is as follows.

{% highlight cpp %}
template <class Scalar> Scalar& vtkImagePointsArray<Scalar>
::GetValueReference(vtkIdType idx)
{
  assert(this->Points);

  const vtkIdType tuple = idx / 3;
  const vtkIdType comp = idx % 3;

  return this->Points->GetPoint(tuple)[comp];
}
{% endhighlight %}

Note that `Points` is actually a `vtkImageData`, which calculates point coordinates
implicitly with the following code.

{% highlight cpp %}
void vtkImageData::GetPoint(vtkIdType ptId, double x[3])
{
  int i, loc[3];
  const double *origin = this->Origin;
  const double *spacing = this->Spacing;
  const int* extent = this->Extent;

  vtkIdType dims[3];
  dims[0] = extent[1] - extent[0] + 1;
  dims[1] = extent[3] - extent[2] + 1;
  dims[2] = extent[5] - extent[4] + 1;

  loc[0] = ptId % dims[0];
  loc[1] = (ptId / dims[0]) % dims[1];
  loc[2] = ptId / (dims[0]*dims[1]);

  for (i=0; i<3; i++)
    {
    x[i] = origin[i] + (loc[i]+extent[i*2]) * spacing[i];
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

I left out some of the code for simplicity. We can exercise this class with the following.

{% highlight cpp %}
vtkNew<vtkRTAnalyticSource> source;
source->SetWholeExtent(-50, 50, -50, 50, -50, 50);
source->Update();

vtkImageData* wavelet = source->GetOutput();

vtkNew<vtkImageData> img;
img->CopyStructure(wavelet);

vtkNew<vtkImagePointsArray<double> > testPts;
testPts->InitializeArray(img.GetPointer());
testPts->SetName("pts");

vtkNew<vtkPoints> points;
points->SetData(testPts.GetPointer());

// This creates an unstructured grid from the input
// image data.
vtkNew<vtkCleanUnstructuredGrid> toUGrid;
toUGrid->SetInputData(wavelet);
toUGrid->Update();

vtkUnstructuredGrid* ugrid = toUGrid->GetOutput();
// Here we substitute the implicit points.
ugrid->SetPoints(points.GetPointer());

vtkNew<vtkContourFilter> contour2;
contour2->SetInputData(ugrid);
contour2->SetValue(0, 200);
contour2->Update();
{% endhighlight %}

## vtkCellSet

Our next step is to define a new unstructured grid that does not store
a new connectivity or point coordinate array for an input grid. Instead,
we want it to simply store the ids of the cells selected by the threshold process.
We will do this by leveraging the mapped unstructured grid functionality
created by David Lonie and described [here](http://www.vtk.org/Wiki/VTK/InSituDataStructures).
We will create a new unstructured grid (subclass of `vtkMappedUnstructuredGrid`)
called `vtkCellSet`. Our first step is to create a helper class (subclass of
`vtkObject`) that takes care of the implementation of core functions. See
[here](https://github.com/berkgeveci/berkgeveci.github.io/blob/jekyll/code/zero-copy/vtkCellSet.h)
and [here](https://github.com/berkgeveci/berkgeveci.github.io/blob/jekyll/code/zero-copy/vtkCellSet.cxx)
for the full implementation.

As I mentioned, this class should store a dataset and a set of selected cells. This looks
as follows.

{% highlight cpp %}
class vtkCellSetImpl : public vtkObject
{
public:
  void SetDataSet(vtkDataSet*);
  void SetCellIds(vtkIdTypeArray*);

private:
  vtkDataSet* DataSet;
  vtkIdTypeArray* CellIds;
};

vtkCxxSetObjectMacro(vtkCellSetImpl,DataSet,vtkDataSet);
vtkCxxSetObjectMacro(vtkCellSetImpl,CellIds,vtkIdTypeArray);
{% endhighlight %}

Then we need to implement a few key methods as follows.

{% highlight cpp %}
vtkIdType vtkCellSetImpl::GetNumberOfCells()
{
  return this->CellIds->GetNumberOfTuples();
}

int vtkCellSetImpl::GetCellType(vtkIdType id)
{
  return this->DataSet->GetCellType(this->CellIds->GetValue(id));
}

void vtkCellSetImpl::GetCellPoints(vtkIdType cellId,
                                   vtkIdList *ptIds)
{
  return this->DataSet->GetCellPoints(this->CellIds->GetValue(cellId),
    ptIds);
}

int vtkCellSetImpl::GetMaxCellSize()
{
  return this->DataSet->GetMaxCellSize();
}
{% endhighlight %}

Note that many of these are deferred to the underlying dataset (`DataSet`).
The key point is that cell ids are transformed using the internal selection
array (`CellIds`) as in this example.

{% highlight cpp %}
void vtkCellSetImpl::GetCellPoints(vtkIdType cellId,
                                   vtkIdList *ptIds)
{
  return this->DataSet->GetCellPoints(this->CellIds->GetValue(cellId),
    ptIds);
}
{% endhighlight %}

This means that any `DataSet` cell not listed in the `CellIds` array
will be ignored by this class. We can exercise this class as follows

{% highlight cpp %}
vtkNew<vtkRTAnalyticSource> source;
source->SetWholeExtent(-50, 50, -50, 50, -50, 50);
source->Update();

vtkImageData* wavelet = source->GetOutput();

vtkNew<vtkImageData> img;
img->CopyStructure(wavelet);

vtkNew<vtkImagePointsArray<double> > testPts;
testPts->InitializeArray(img.GetPointer());
testPts->SetName("pts");

vtkNew<vtkPoints> points;
points->SetData(testPts.GetPointer());

vtkNew<vtkCellSet> cellSet;
cellSet->SetPoints(points.GetPointer());
cellSet->GetPointData()->PassData(wavelet->GetPointData());
cellSet->GetImplementation()->SetDataSet(wavelet);

vtkNew<vtkIdTypeArray> ids;
vtkIdType ncells = wavelet->GetNumberOfCells();
ids->SetNumberOfTuples(ncells/2);
for (vtkIdType i=0; i<ncells/2; i++)
  {
  ids->SetValue(i, i);
  }

cellSet->GetImplementation()->SetCellIds(ids.GetPointer());

vtkNew<vtkContourFilter> contour;
contour->SetValue(0, 150);
contour->SetInputData(cellSet.GetPointer());
contour->Update();
{% endhighlight %}

Here, we restricted the contour filter to the first half of
the cells of the original image data by simply creating a `vtkCellSet`.
Note that this code would have been almost identical whether we were
dealing with an image data, structured grid or an unstructured grid.
All `vtkCellSet` needs is a `vtkDataSet` and a set of cell ids.

This is it! When I first worked on this example, I could not believe
that it is this simple. Granted, I left some of the more complex methods
such as `GetPointCells()` unimplemented because I didn't need them. Still,
with some additional data structures, it would be fairly easy to implement
them. We will discuss a new threshold filter that uses the `vtkCellSet`
class in a future blog.
